Paul in particular cannot be stopped. At
one point they stoned him, gets up,
[music] goes to the next town. There's
nothing you can do because the spirit is
behind this whole thing.
>> That's right. It's like podcast. Yeah.
>> Unstoppable.
>> [music]
>> What really did happen on Easter Sunday?
How did a first-century Jew
revolutionize the world's moral [music]
vision? When you accept Christ as a
savior, it changes your heart. It
changes [music] your life. As children
of God, let's let's work to end
injustice. The most [music] important
commandment is to love the Lord and to
love your neighbor as yourself. [music]
And how much power does his message have
today for people inclined to treat the
Bible skeptically?
>> The Christian share [music] of the US
population has declined, while the
religiously unaffiliated share has
grown. My guest this week has spent his
entire career wrestling [music] with the
Christian Gospels. First, as an
evangelical believer
>> Religion is based on faith, but I don't
think faith has to be blind. And then as
a renowned and famously skeptical
>> [music]
>> scholar of the New Testament.
Bart Ehrman, welcome to Interesting
Times. Well, thanks for having me.
Thanks for being here, and it's [music]
the week of Easter. It's Holy Week for
Christians. This episode will appear on
Holy Thursday, so just before Good
Friday, just before Easter. And we're
appropriately going to talk about Jesus
as a historical figure, as a religious
figure, how those two aspects uh fit
together, which are questions that have
been central to your own work, your
scholarship, uh and your celebrity as an
academic and popular writer.
And but I want to start with your latest
book, which focuses on Jesus as a moral
revolutionary, I guess you would say.
Someone who kind of helped bring a new
mode of ethics into the world. And the
title is Love Thy Stranger, How the
Teachings of Jesus Transformed the Moral
Conscience of the West. So, let's start
with the subtitle. What was so
transformative about Jesus's moral
message?
You know, a lot of my a lot of my
students assume that before uh Jesus
came along, uh
there wasn't morality in the Greek and
Roman world. I My my interest is in the
South, and so it's you know, Southern
students, most of them raised Christian,
who just assume that morality came with
Christianity. That's absolutely not
right. So, I'm I am absolutely not
arguing like Jesus introduced the idea
of love into the world, you know, or the
idea of altruism into the world.
>> [gasps]
>> What I am arguing is that we today
uh almost all of us, whether we're
Christian, whether agnostic, atheist,
whatever we are whatever we are in the
West, when there's a disaster that
happens, we feel like we ought to do
something about it. There's a hurricane,
there's uh wildfires, there's a
earthquake, uh and we feel like we ought
to do something. So, we might send a
check, for example. Or, you know, we
retire and we decide to volunteer the
soup kitchen. We're helping people we
don't know, and we probably would never
will know, and we we may not like when
we get to know if we did get to know
them. So, why do we help them? My
argument in the book is that that sense
that we should help people in need, even
if we don't know them, uh ultimately
derives from the teachings of Jesus.
That in Greek and Roman moral philosophy
uh at the time, uh this was not an issue
at all. You were not you were not
supposed to be helping people who just
because they were in need. But that
Jesus ba- based large part on his Jewish
background, but with some
transformations of of what he himself
knew growing up, uh is the one who who
who made this part of our conscience.
And how how much of the change is about
strangers versus about, let's say,
enemies? Or or is this sort of an
overlapping category, right? Because
obviously one of the starkest things
that Jesus says in terms of the kind of
moral radicalism you're describing is
love thy enemy, and one of the most
famous parables that relates to this is
the parable of the Good Samaritan, where
Well, why don't you What is the parable
of the Good Samaritan, actually? Why
don't [laughter] Why don't you describe
in your own words?
>> The parable is that there's a a Jewish
man who's been going down he's going
down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and on
the route uh he gets attacked by a group
of thugs who beat him up and steal steal
what he has, and he they and they leave
him naked beside the road. And later a
priest from the temple is going on the
same road and sees him and walks on the
other side and bypasses him, doesn't do
anything. And then a Levite, who is one
of the assistants in the temple, uh
comes down, sees him, bypasses him.
But then a Samaritan comes along. So,
the backdrop of the story is that the
Samaritans were understood to be the
enemies of the Jews. The Samaritan comes
by and he sees this man and he goes over
and he helps him. So,
>> [snorts]
>> that happens, and then Jesus asks his
the person he's talking to, who which
one of these was the neighbor? Well,
it's the Samaritan. So, the idea is that
if you're going to be if you're going to
love your neighbor, it doesn't just mean
somebody who's within your own religion
or your own ethnicity or your own
nation. It's if somebody's in need,
that's your neighbor. And that's what it
means to love your neighbor as yourself.
So, so Jesus is getting the idea of love
your neighbor and even love your
stranger as yourself from
from his Jewish heritage, but within
Israel, it's love your fellow Israelite
as yourself. And Jesus is now
universalizing it. And so, part of the
part of the thesis of my book is that
that mentality is what led to huge
institutional changes in the West, uh
including the invention of public
hospitals, orphanages, old people's
homes, uh private charities dealing with
hunger and homelessness, governmental
assistance to those who are poor. All of
those are Christian innovations. You You
can establish historically.
So, this is a work of
I guess you could call it sort of
cultural and intellectual history, but I
think it's pretty obvious that you also
want to make a point that's relevant to
our moral and political debates right
now.
Is that fair?
Uh it is.
>> So, what what do you want readers
Christian or otherwise to take away from
this argument that connects to
let's say America in the age of the age
of Donald Trump. Well, so I don't get
overly uh political. I I have very
strong political views, um many of which
could not agree with yours.
>> [laughter]
>> I'm I am a studiously neutral
interviewer, [laughter] Professor, but
but but please but please continue.
I'm just saying I'm I tend to be on the
liberal side of the
of the um
you know, the trajectory of and so of
the spectrum. And so, but it [snorts]
doesn't really matter cuz in the book,
I'm not arguing for a par- particular
political position or social agenda
position or not. What I am saying is
that if people claim to be followers of
Jesus, they ought to follow his
teachings. And his teachings are quite
clear that um that you should uh care
for people who are not like you, the
other. Uh you're not supposed to, you
know, bomb them back to the you know,
Stone Age, and you're not supposed to um
you know, make them suffer because you
don't like them or you don't want them
among you. You're supposed to take care
of them. So, again, I uh we haven't
brought this up yet, but I mean, I'm not
myself a Christian, so I'm not arguing
this for you.
>> We're going to We're going to get to
We're going to get to that.
>> I'm just saying I'm not making an
apology for Christianity here, but I am
saying this was Jesus' teachings this
was his teaching, and
uh even though I'm not a Christian, I
subscribe to that idea. But what bothers
me is there's so many Christians in our
world claim to be Christian, claim to be
followers of Jesus, and don't follow his
most basic teaching about this.
So, I do want to
talk about your own beliefs um
and your intellectual work and how those
fit together, and I think they will lead
us back in the end to the argument in
the book. One I'll just put one kind of
moral philosophical question to you, I
guess, on behalf maybe of at least some
of the people you're criticizing.
One of the notable things about the 21st
century world is that globalization and
digital life have sort of combined to
create this sense of sort of global
immediacy at all times, right? Where,
you know, you go on social media, you
turn on the TV, and sort of events in
incredibly distant lands are brought
immediately to the fore, right? In
[snorts] the parable of the Good
Samaritan,
the Samaritan cares for the Jew for who
with whom he is confronted like
physically, right? The person is right
there. He is physically the Samaritan's
neighbor, even if politically, morally,
and so on, they're separate. Um
isn't it a hard question how that
generalizes to a world where
in theory you have some kind of
relationship to 8 billion people? Yes.
No, it's the
You can't simply take the teachings of
the New Testament and transplant them
into the 21st century. I mean, it
>> [laughter]
>> You know, it if any government tried to
institute as their as their governmental
policy the Sermon on the Mount, you
know, they'd last about 2 days, period.
I mean, so you I'm not saying that it's
this kind of simplistic equivalent. What
I am saying is that if people in power
claim to be Christian, they ought to
take very seriously what that means. Um
I'm not saying that it's going to
necessarily affect immigration policy,
for example, but the Bible's quite clear
um that just in even in the Old
Testament, love your neighbor as
yourself meant your fellow Israelite, or
it explicitly states anybody who
immigrates into Israel
>> [snorts]
>> is to be treated like an Israelite. So,
does that have any effect or not? I
mean, if you're not a Christian, no, it
wouldn't have any effect. If you are a
Christian, you at least thought it like
think about it. All right, let's talk
let's talk more about your own
relationship to Christianity. And I feel
like often when I read a book or an
essay
by someone who says, "I'm not a
Christian, but
as a historian or as a cultural critic,
I'm here to emphasize Christianity's
importance for the culture that we all
live in."
That person often is sort of tiptoeing
toward Christian belief. That sometimes
is sort of an intellectual way station
where first you say Christianity is
important, and then you say, "Ah, well,
maybe it might be true."
In your case, you've already taken a
journey out of Christian belief. Um
tell me about that journey. Tell me
about your own religious background
before you became
a professor of New Testament history.
Uh yeah, well, continued on after that,
too.
>> [laughter]
>> But yeah, so I you know, I I was born in
a I was born in a Christian household,
and I grew up in Kansas, and so um
fairly conservative area, and uh I was
raised Episcopalian. Uh was uh an active
church person as a kid, altar boy.
Um when I was 15 in high school, I had a
born-again experience.
Uh became a uh committed evangelical uh
Christian.
What was that like? How did you have a
born-again experience? Um I started
attending a uh a youth group uh
Campus Life Youth for Christ club, and
the fellow who ran that
was probably in his mid-20s, and he had
he was a very gung-ho uh evangelical
Christian who believed um that if you
don't commit your life personally to
Christ as your Lord and Savior, you're
not really a you're not really a
Christian. So, it didn't matter that I
went to the Episcopal Church every week,
and that I served as an altar boy, and
that I confessed my sins, and I said the
prayers, and I sang the hymns. To the To
the contrary, that you know, could have
been a whited sepulcher, right? That's
exactly right. That's exactly how he
would have thought That's how he thought
of it. And until I asked Jesus into my
heart, you know, as as he put it, I
wasn't really a Christian. And you know,
I wanted to be a Christian.
And so um
so uh I did that. I uh I uh committed my
life personally to Christ as my Lord and
Savior, and became um
became very gung-ho about my religious
faith. Did you Did Sorry, did you feel
that as a personal transformation? Yes,
very much so. It's a It was a um
kind of an elevated uh spiritual
experience where you felt kind of a
burst of joy,
and a a sense that something had changed
now.
And so, when they call it a born-again
experience, many people actually have
that sensation. Other people don't, but
I I I happened to.
This fellow had gone to Moody Bible
Institute for his college, and he was a
He's very big on learning about the
Bible. I knew nothing about the Bible as
an Episcopalian. Right. You know, they
they'd read it and then preach on it,
but it's like I didn't know anything.
And so, I got really
>> As As Catholics, we always think that's
the safest approach.
>> [laughter]
>> I know.
>> Sorry.
That's a joke for Protestant and and
Catholic listeners. Go on. Sorry. No,
when I taught at Rutgers, most my
students were Catholic, and I mean it
was a big big sea change when I moved to
the South, yeah. So, anyway, I I decided
to be a committed Christian, go to Moody
Bible Institute, and I I really did
become a Bible nerd there. I mean, that
was um
that was day and night studying Bible
and theology for for 3 years.
>> And Moody you would describe as
fundamentalist
>> That's in some way, right? Which Which
effectively means Well, there's a lot of
stuff associated with it, but
fundamentally it means that
the Bible is inerrant in a really strong
understanding of the term. Any
contradictions should be reconcilable.
>> That's right.
Contradictions not just internal
contradictions within itself, but or
between books for say, but with science,
you know, or Right. you know, 6-day
creation, Adam and Eve, which is like
all the flood all historically happened,
and everything about the Gospels
literally happened, and and so um yeah,
it was it was fundamentalist in that
sense, and I bought into it, you know, I
just thought that I was you know, and so
um
when I when I left there, I went to
Wheaton College, which was Billy
Graham's alma mater, uh which for me was
a step towards liberalism.
Yeah. [laughter]
And um I started moving away from the
kind of strict fundamentalist thing.
I didn't I'm not going You don't want to
hear the whole story, but I decided I
wanted to uh do a PhD studying Greek
manuscripts of the New Testament. And
the world expert on that was a guy named
Bruce Metzger. Taught at Princeton
Theological Seminary. So, [snorts] I
applied there, and I went there, and I
studied with him. I did both the
master's degree and a PhD there, and
became an expert in ancient Greek
manuscripts.
And over time, I moved away from this
evangelical belief, especially this
hardcore inerrantist thing.
>> [gasps]
>> And um by the time I was through there,
I was I was a um I was a fairly mainline
Protestant, you know, Christian who um I
When I graduated, I was a pastor of a
Baptist church for a year, Princeton
Baptist Church. Uh it was a an American
Baptist church, and
preached on the radio every week.
>> You know, you were the you were the
second former American Baptist pastor
that we have had on this show. Straight
Ryan Burge, the great religion data
analyst. Anyway, just a just a striking
fact. So, you were a pastor. So, as a
mainline
Protestant Yeah. Christian, your
relationship to the New Testament was
basically to say
the fundamentalists
overstate how
error-and-contradiction-free these
documents are, but there's still good
reason to think that
Jesus is the son of God, raised from the
dead on the third day, and so on. Well,
>> Or or had you drifted Had you drifted a
bit from that, too?
>> I I still [clears throat] would have
affirmed that, um but I but as time went
on, I
I started realizing that I wasn't I
didn't really believe all of the the
kind of straight-up doctrines. It turns
out there are a lot of um mainline
Protestant ministers still today who who
wouldn't who don't think Jesus was
literally born of a virgin, or even that
he's necessarily physically raised from
the dead. Right.
And I kind of moved in I moved in that
direction. But until about 30 years ago,
I was still a committed Christian. And
then why did you cease to be a committed
Christian?
Uh it wasn't related to my scholarship,
um or my understanding of the Bible, or
the understanding of the historical
development of Christianity. It wasn't
related to that.
It was uh because of the problem of
suffering.
Why is there so much suffering in the
world? I When I taught at Rutgers for a
few years, and when I was there, uh I
was asked to teach a class called The
Problem of Suffering in the biblical
traditions.
And when I got asked to teach the class,
I thought it would be a great idea
because I had long thought that every
author of the Bible in one way or
another is trying to wrestle with the
problem of especially why the people of
God suffer.
And I had realized by this time that
there's not an answer in the Bible.
There are lots of different answers. And
some of these answers are in conflict
with each other.
And so,
uh I taught this class, and um I thought
afterwards I thought, "Man, that's I
need to think more about this. I need
You know, and
actually, when I got done with this
class, I I should write a book about
that." I was like 30s like 32 years old
or something.
>> [laughter]
>> Wait a second. What are you talking
You're 32? You got the answer to
suffering? I mean, look, as a as a
newspaper columnist, the the rule is
that, you know, there's no obstacle to
trying to solve the problem of evil in
800 words. So, why should there be an
obstacle to a a 32-year-old writing on
it? Yeah. Um but so, this was a pivot
point where you decided
Did you decide that God could not exist,
or did you decide that the Christian God
was unlikely to exist? Like a God who
has particular attributes related to
goodness as we understand it. I came to
think that the idea that
any monotheistic religion has a problem
with the existence of God given the
state of suffering in the world.
And um I'm not you know, I'm not a
radical atheist who insists, you know,
there is no God, but I don't think there
is. I don't think there's a uh
I don't think there's any kind of
supernatural power that's overseeing the
world, that is active in people's lives,
that actually answers prayer. I I don't
I don't believe a God like that exists.
Because such a God to exist would have
to be
bad, wicked, or
>> No.
Uh I don't think that that kind of God
would have to be anything. Uh and so,
it's not that I have some kind of
criterion for what that God must be.
It's that I think it's unlikely that
there's a God who's active in the world.
Because in my view, if there was a God
who was all-powerful, Tom granting an
all If there was an all-powerful God If
there was an all-powerful God who was
loving,
>> [gasps and sighs]
>> then you know, we uh there wouldn't be
people who starve to death every minute.
Which is what happens.
So, you know, I just came to think, you
know, I think it's not true. I don't I
don't believe there is some kind of
divine power that is over overseeing
this world.
I think that a more conservative
Christian listening to that narrative
might say that
you see a separation between how your
view of the Bible and the New Testament
changed, and how your view of God
changed. But the conservative Christian
might say, "Well, it seems like there's
more of a progression here, where you
start out as a firm believer in a
literal resurrection, and then you
become a believer in sort of Jesus
having been maybe spiritually present to
the disciples, and then from there
the possibility of an all-powerful,
all-good God sort of slips away. But But
there is sort of a movement there, where
how you think about the New Testament
does shape how you think about the
likelihood that there's a God who cares,
right? It's not completely separate." Um
I think it's separate, because I I
believed I believed in God for a long
time after I
So, the views I teach
the the kind of scholarship I do now is
exactly the scholarship I did when I was
a Christian.
So,
so I can see how people would think that
that it's kind of a domino effect. And
when I was an evangelical, we talked
about the you know, the slippery slope
that leads to perdition.
You give up one thing, man, then it's
all over. And so I get that, but you
know, I I have my my closest friend, my
two closest friends are Presbyterian
ministers
who are active in the church, and they
basically think what I think about the
Bible.
Right. Now, I'm not saying it's
inevitable. Yeah. The the progression.
>> Yeah. But I'm just saying like if you
held it as more of an if you held it as
an established fact, right, that Jesus
rose from the dead on the third day and
so on,
>> Mhm. you would necessarily have to give
a little bit more credence to the
possibility of a God who intervenes in
the world, right? Yes. If if I believe
Jesus was raised from the dead,
necessarily I would believe in God, yes.
Yes. Okay, well, that's Cuz there's no
other way. Right. Right. But if but if
I'm just saying there is some
progression there where the court the
kind of your Presbyterian minister
friends, right, who would say, "Well,
Jesus I I'm not putting words in their
mouth, but Jesus didn't Jesus, you know,
had a power had powerful moral teaching,
was crucified, and was
present to the disciples in some way
after the resurrection. That's a weaker
claim on God's behalf, right, than the
claim that Jesus was walking around and
eating fish and so on. Yeah. So, once
you've moved to the weaker claim, there
is a general weakening. That's all
That's all I'm suggesting. Yeah. And but
you would say you still I mean, just
being here talking about the book you've
just written, you're still drawing moral
value from the New Testament even as an
agnostic. Oh, yeah. Absolutely. Yeah.
Um
All right, I want to get a little bit
deeper into
uh the debate about the history of Jesus
and the New Testament the the
historicity, sorry, of the New
Testament. And in doing some prep for
this episode, uh I noticed that at one
point once you had a 7-hour
debate with a more conservative scholar
of scripture, and I asked my producers
if we could have 7 hours for this, and
they said yes. So, buckle I don't know
what plans you've made [laughter] for
the rest of the day, Bart, but you're
here. Now, we have slightly less time
than that. So, we're going to try and do
a we're going to try and skim the
surface of what is
uh an inc- I think an just an incredibly
fascinating debate regardless of
where you come down or what conclusions
you draw from it. To start out, imagine
that
the listener or viewer has very little
contact with the debate or even with
Christianity itself, right? What what is
the historical raw material that the New
Testament gives us in terms of
understanding the life of Jesus and the
early church? So, we have four gospels
in the New Testament, Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John. They are our the
earliest surviving accounts of Jesus uh
life.
Uh outside of those four accounts,
there's very little information about
the historical Jesus even within the New
Testament.
The New Testament has 27 books, and most
of it doesn't say very much at all about
what his life was like between the time
he's born and the time he died.
Uh Paul has more writings than anyone
else, and doesn't say anything about his
miracles or any confrontations or, you
know, he doesn't tell us about his life.
For a reason, I mean, for good reasons.
But it what that means is we basically
have four accounts um in the New
Testament about his his words and deeds.
Um we have accounts from outside the New
Testament, lots of them, other gospels,
for example, but generally they're seen
to be not historically reliable even by
people who wish they were. Um So,
basically, if we want to know about
Jesus' life, we have Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John.
Um And what is the just very quickly,
what is the
scholarly consensus on the relationship
of the four gospels that we have? Or
what is your own view or both? Well, my
view is the common view. We have the
first three, Matthew, Mark, and Luke,
have very many of the same stories,
usually in the same sequence, and often
word for word the same.
And that that has long been thought by
scholars to indicate that somebody's
copying somebody.
So, almost almost everybody agrees that
Mark was the first gospel written. It's
our shortest gospel, and it appears to
have been used by both Matthew and Luke.
Um so that Matthew and Luke have most of
the stories in Mark, often the same
sequence, same words, word for word. So,
uh Mark is first, Matthew and Luke used
Mark and had material of their own
that they added to it. Sometimes Matthew
and Luke have similar material. Um
sometimes they have different material.
Those three are then called the synoptic
gospels, which means you can see them
together because you can put them in
columns next to each other
>> Right.
>> and actually read each section of the
same
>> the same story, right?
>> Yeah. And it's interesting to see how
they differ at that point. But John John
has very little of the material in
Matthew, Mark, and Luke up to the time
where Jesus is arrested. Um So, the
passion narrative, the account of his
his death has similar stories in John,
but John John um records mainly his own
miracles, his own encounters of Jesus,
his own teachings of Jesus
that are different from Matthew, Mark,
and Luke. And so, um And Jesus talks
longer in John, right? That's that's it.
Very much so.
When you get to John, entire chapters
are Jesus talking. Um at one point, he
starts talking in chapter 13 at his his
last meal, and he talks through chapter
13, chapter 14, chapter 15, chapter 16,
then launches into prayer chapter 17.
That's all Jesus virtually all Jesus
talking. So, that's right, that is
different.
>> Yeah.
>> [clears throat]
>> And then in addition,
you've already mentioned Paul's letters.
Um but there's a large number of
letters,
and there are the Acts of the Apostles,
>> Mhm. which seems to be written by the
same author as the Gospel of Luke.
>> That's right. And both of those in
different ways are sort of windows into
the early church. And it's then it's
fair to say
since the 19th century, maybe late 18th
century,
there's just been endless attempts to
sort of drill down skeptically into the
claims that uh these books make and how
closely they are actually connected to
the early church. You have debates about
who wrote the gospels, when they were
written. You already mentioned lost
gospels, books that were supposedly
suppressed. Debates about whether Jesus
really claimed to be divine, on on and
on and on. Um
I think it's notable to me as a reader
of your work that as a agnostic and
skeptic of sort of the full historicity
of the New Testament, you do think some
kinds of skepticism go too far. Um so,
one of the books you've written is about
people who think that Jesus didn't
exist, right, that he's a mythological
figure. Why should we think that Jesus
existed?
Well, let me say let me say that I don't
I mean
historians by their very nature are
skeptical because they're dealing with
sources that they have to evaluate. And
um so, this isn't just this isn't a
thing about Jesus per se, it's about how
history works that you've got to
evaluate your sources.
Um I don't, you know, I I'm never gone
into my scholarship trying to like
disprove things. It's just you try to
figure out what happened in the past.
And there are people uh today who call
themselves mythicists who think that
Jesus did not even exist.
And I I don't object to that because
it's too skeptical. I object to it
because it's not historical. And so, I
you know, I'm just interested in knowing
historically what happened what really
happened. And when it comes to the
historical Jesus, the evidence is just
so overwhelming. I mean, it's
I don't think you can really have a
bonafide question about whether the man
existed. The question is what did he say
and do?
And that's that's where you start
getting in into trouble. But the
the reason there are lots of reasons for
thinking Jesus really existed. I mean,
for one, just to take one very basic
thing, the Apostle Paul we mentioned, he
he was writing letters um in the '50s
and the '60s. Jesus probably died around
the year 30.
Paul in his letters talks about his
meetings with James, the brother of
Jesus.
So, you know, if
So, what I put it sarcastically is if if
if
if you know, if um if Jesus didn't
exist, you would think his brother would
know that. Right? [laughter] But Paul
Paul's conferred with James.
So, it's uh there are things like that.
>> Right.
>> And so, yeah, uh Jesus, I think he
certainly existed. That doesn't tell you
what he said and did, though.
>> And but it's fair to say it's
um
even by the standards of secular
history, right, he's an unusually
well-attested
figure in just in terms of how many
people are writing about him. Yeah. And
this is something I think that people
kind of overlook because
I mean, I
I I often say, and it's absolutely true,
that Jesus is never mentioned in any
Greek and Roman source of the first
century except for um
outside of Jews and Christians, not
mentioned at all. And people say, "Oh,
well, then he probably didn't exist."
Well, how many people are mentioned?
>> [laughter]
>> I mean,
you know, like the most you know,
Philo is like the most famous Jew from
the period. I mean, how many people talk
about him? No one.
>> [laughter]
>> You know, so so Right. The Roman the
Romans and Greeks generally thought they
had better things Yeah. Better things to
do. But also but also, right, again,
even extremely well-attested figures,
you're dealing with sources that come
later and, you know, are you know, where
you're sort of putting things together.
Yeah. You know, if you're talking about
even like the life of Julius Caesar,
right?
>> it. I mean, you you know, you'll have
Roman you know, emperors and things
talked about, but who else is talked
about? You know, in a world like the
Roman Empire had about 60 million
people. How many people how many of
those 60 million people in Jesus' day do
we actually have a record of? Yeah,
very, very few. So, the fact you don't
have a record isn't like weird, it's
it's what you'd expect.
>> Right.
Um
So, So then another point, the idea that
basically there were just tons of
Gospels
that have just as good a claim to be
connected to Jesus as the ones in the
New Testament that were then suppressed
for political and theological reasons
later.
And you know, this gets sort of the full
treatment in The Da Vinci Code and sort
of popular culture like that. You've
written obviously there are lots of
Yeah. rival Gospels.
Why should we give at least a certain
degree of priority to the ones that we
have in the New Testament versus the
others? Well, it's not on a priori
grounds. I mean, it's not because
they're in the Bible. It's It's that um
So I did I actually did an addition of
these other Gospels where I believe that
I own it. Yeah, so So I just So I and
I'm really interested in these things.
But everybody who's interested in
historical Jesus from a historical point
of view has to take every potential
source seriously and examine it in
detail and consider does this provide
historical information or not? On the
kind of historical on the grounds of the
kind of historical criteria that
historians use to figure out what did
you know, what did Abraham Lincoln
really say or do? You know, what did
Julius Caesar You use the same criteria.
And when you apply these criteria to
these other Gospels, it
there's almost none There are virtually
none of them that you can consider as
historically reliable. Possibly the
Gospel of Thomas which says it has 114
sayings of Jesus discovered in 1945.
About half of which are like you get in
Matthew, Mark, and Luke. The other half
are not. Possibly some of those sayings
in there could go back to Jesus. Apart
from that, virtually none of these
Gospels is going to give you historical
information. So the New Testament, the
books we have, the Gospels, the letters
of Paul, the Acts of the Apostles, all
of this maybe takes us as close to
Jesus' life as we're likely to get
pending some Yes.
>> novel discovery
in a cave or in the you know, the ruins
of Pompeii or something else. Pompeii
the timing might be wrong. Um
But you don't think that's close enough
for them to be truly credible as
historical narratives. Why?
Well, I think there's I think they're
credible historical narratives in the
Gospels. I think we can find things that
Jesus really did say and he really did
do.
Um
But I don't I don't think that you can
simply read the Gospels and think oh,
that's what Jesus really said and did.
So there are a lot of reasons for that.
Um The The
The first thing that I
>> me three.
Three Three reasons.
They are They They are contradictory to
each other describing the same event.
Where you'll have um where they both
can't be right because they are
contradictory.
They are written by people who were not
there at the time. Who didn't live in
the Jewish homeland. Who did not speak
Aramaic. They're living
They're living
decades later.
And are recording accounts that they've
heard. So that's two things. The The
authors living much later and the
contradiction The third thing is these
authors got their stories from
somewhere.
If we don't know where the authors
lived. We don't know who the authors
were. They
The Gospels circulated anonymously
before they had names attached to them.
So we don't know. We call them Matthew,
Mark, Luke, and John. But we don't I'm
just going to You know, go on. Go on.
Sorry.
>> we can get back to that because that
that's that's a valid simple point.
>> There's some debate. But Oh, there
There's debates about everything. That's
welcome to history. So So um
These authors do not claim to be
eyewitnesses. They do not narrate things
in the first person. They describe Jesus
and his disciples in the third person.
They're as I said, they're writing in a
different language living decades later.
The question is where did they get their
stories?
Um
The one thing we can say about
Christianity in this period from the
time Jesus died to the time say the end
of the Gospel of John. Say Say that's a
60-year period.
Um is that Christianity was spreading
throughout the Mediterranean.
Um It started out as a small group in
Jerusalem. And by the time the end of
the first century, we know of Christian
groups who are scattered throughout
Judea, Galilee, Syria, over to what we
today think of as Turkey, Asia Minor,
over to Greece, in Rome, possibly North
Africa, possibly Spain.
So in those 70 years, Christianity has
spread. There's no social media. There
no There's no newspapers. There
Most people, the vast majority people
are illiterate. Cannot read.
It almost certainly spread by people
telling stories about Jesus.
So somebody tell in somebody in
Jerusalem tells a story to somebody else
in Jerusalem and then somebody from
Antioch comes. He tells them the story.
This is go This goes on for 30, 40, 50
years before they are written down.
So what happens to the stories?
Um
They change.
And the evidence that they change is we
have different accounts of the same
story that are different.
Where does the fact that the Gospels
contain
stories of miracles
including
most notably the resurrection, also
plenty of secondary miracles, healings,
and so on. Um
Where does that fit into
the reasons for historical skepticism?
Is it itself just an automatic reason
for skepticism that you should discount
No.
>> historical narratives that claim that
No. someone walked on water? I think
saying historical skepticism is a
tautology.
History has to be is skeptical.
So it's not it's not that you're doing
historical skepticism, you're doing
history.
Um But I mean I
agree 100% but suppose you present to me
two stories, right? That follow the same
trajectory you've described. They've
They're written down later. They pass
through some kind of oral history.
They're written in a new language.
They're the same story except one of
them has a miracle in it, one of them
doesn't. Does the skeptical historian,
tautological again, say the miracle is
an extra reason
to think that
one of these stories has been garbled
compared to the other?
>> I think what the historian does is they
look at the miracle story and they judge
whether it probably happened or not.
Because that's what you do with history
generally.
>> Right. And so what's the probability
of Jesus walking on the water?
Like how do you establish that as a
historically That's a very good
question. How do you establish that
historically? You cannot. Okay.
Because um all his All historians can do
It doesn't matter who you're studying in
history. You can be studying
Charlemagne. Whoever you're studying
studying Baal Shem Tov um who is the
founder of Hasidic Judaism who has
eyewitness accounts of his miracles.
Fantastic miracles just within the last
year. And we're not talking about
thousands of years now. And so historian
looks at the accounts of Baal Shem Tov
doing things like sticking his finger up
against the tree making it come on fire
to burn to warm themselves up and or
whatever. I mean, you have all of these
accounts.
And you ask what's How do we account for
the story? Well, how do you establish
things happening in the past? I mean,
what
What kind of criteria do you use as a
historian to figure out whether
something likely happened or not? And
you have a set of criteria. But you
know, for example, do you have
independent witnesses?
Is it something that's plausible? Is it
something that ever happened ever in the
history of the universe before?
Like so suppose you've got a story and
you're not sure Did somebody make this
up? Or did it actually happen? Like
Jesus walking on the water. Did it
actually happen or did somebody make it
up? Now, has anybody ever made up a
story of a miracle that didn't happen?
Yeah, yeah, happens all the time. Has
anybody ever actually walked on water?
Yeah, well, no, not in recorded history.
In other words
So what is the likely I'm not So I'm not
saying that it's impossible. I'm not
saying it's impossible that Jesus walked
on the water.
I'm saying that if it did happen,
there's no way for us to establish it
historically. Because other explanations
are always far more likely.
But does that mean then that
you are essentially taking a kind of
a view of miracles that says that there
is no scale of historical attestation
that could make you say this possibly
happened just because you'll you'll
always default to by definition miracles
are things that don't normally happen,
right? Like if to take to take a a
different example
the Yale historian Carlos Eire wrote a
book recently called They Flew. It's a
book about accounts of levitating saints
in the 16th and 17th century.
And Eire basically makes the case and
this is of course debatable like all
such things. But he makes the case that
the level of historical attestation for
these events is at the level or above
the level that you would normally need
to say these things happened. Like
independent witnesses, lots of different
writers writing about it, people have
reasons to be skeptical saying it
happened. All of these things, right?
But then you're still left with the fact
that you know, do people normally fly?
No. Do people normally levitate? No. So
I'm just curious in like is there any
level of historical attestation where
you would say, okay, this makes this
miracle more likely to have happened? Or
are we just defaulting to the idea that
miracles are impossible and so the
historian
can never assert that one possibly
happened?
Um
I would say you have to consider every
possible account.
And
consider who the witnesses are.
And evaluate whether it's more probable
that that happened or that witnesses got
it wrong. Or somebody made it up. At
every point.
>> [snorts]
>> So, you don't make a categorical
decision,
this could not have happened.
Part of the problem with history is that
history's actually not explaining just
what happened.
History is explaining what we can
establish probably happened.
And so, the past is not history.
The past is the past. Our only access to
it is through historical inquiry.
So, let I mean let me give you a
separate like a different example just
to kind of explain this for people who
aren't quite following this. See,
it is impossible for you to take your
your your coffee, your black coffee, and
pour half and half into it and stir it.
And to stir it enough that the half and
half comes out of it.
I mean, it's basically it's the second
law of thermodynamics. It can't happen.
And at least it never has happened. So,
suppose somebody from uh 1950 says that
they saw somebody in 1920 do this.
You know, and suppose you got five
people who say, "Yeah, in 30 years ago
we saw this person stir the coffee, stir
the milk in the coffee, and they stirred
it right out of it."
Um
what's the likelihood that those five
people would be right? I'd say the
likelihood is virtually zero.
Is it likely somebody could have made it
up?
That somebody could have seen something
that they thought was that, that they
that it was a magician, that it was
somebody with sleight of hand. Do those
things ever happen? Yeah, that happens
all the time. Right. Does anybody do
this thing? No, it never happens. So,
which is more probable?
Do you think that there's a
risk in New Testament historical
scholarship
of taking the fact that
the Gospels include miracles and
using that as a reason to become overly
skeptical
of them? Yes, I think that is a risk.
And I would but I would say that
it's not that people who are critical of
the of the New
The vast majority of critical scholars
of the New Testament are actually
Christian believers.
So, I'm an odd duck. I mean, I'm I'm an
agnostic, I'm an atheist, and I'm a New
Testament scholar, and that is weird.
It's not So, it's not that everybody's
approaching this thing trying to destroy
the miracles or or anything like that.
Most people doing this are actually
church-going Christians.
Right. Let's get Let me just give you
one one example of
um sort of how how this problem might
manifest itself, and you can tell me why
why you think I'm wrong, right? So,
um you mentioned earlier that
you know, you yourself would probably
date the Gospels to the later part of
the first century, right? Um so, the
'80s. Usually it's thought The The The
typical view is that Mark was written in
the first around 70. Matthew and Luke
around 80, 85. John around 90, 95.
>> Right.
And this makes a difference to the
question of their credibility for the
reasons that you've already laid out.
The longer stories are circulating in
oral tradition. Right? The more
errors, confabulations, all of these
things creep into them, right? So, it
The Gospels look They're They're still
important historical sources, but they
look less historically credible if you
plant them in 85 versus 60, right?
>> Well, I wouldn't say I wouldn't say
necessarily. I mean, somebody could
write a book on Thomas Jefferson today
and be more accurate than a account that
was written a year after his death.
And so, it's not necessarily as if the
length of time is the issue. The The
other thing about oral tradition, of
course, is that stories change
overnight. I mean, you know, you
You have You've You've had things told
about you the next day that just aren't
true, right? [laughter] I mean, I I know
I have. Never. Never. Never. Okay. Okay.
Well, I'll I'll start tomorrow then.
I'll say
>> Right. Well, no, that's I I I want to
get at that at that question in a
minute. But just on on this question,
right? So,
there are many reasons that scholars
have for offering that kind of later
dating, right? But one of the reasons
that shows up
pretty consistently in the literature is
the fact that at various moments in the
Gospels, Jesus has discourses where he
seems to predict something like the
destruction of the Jewish Temple, Mhm.
which happens in 70 AD at the hands of
Roman armies, right?
>> Yeah. And just to take as the example
the Gospel of Luke, right? So, the
Gospel of Luke then connects to
the Book of Acts, the story of the Acts
of the Apostles. They're written
seemingly by the same author. That's
right. Acts The Acts of the Apostles is,
you know, it starts out with the early
church. It ends up following the career
of St. Paul, and it ends pretty abruptly
in the early '60s with Paul a prisoner
in Rome.
Um and that's that's just sort of where
where where the book ends. Yeah.
Soon after that,
a lot of incredibly crazy stuff happens,
right? You have the martyrdom of Paul
and Peter.
You have Nero's first persecution
of the Christians, and then you have the
Jewish War and the destruction of the
Temple, right? So, it's a very
action-packed decade. Mhm.
It has always seemed to me that the most
straightforward reading of Acts ending
where it does without any detail of
those subsequent events is just that
the writer wasn't aware of those
subsequent events and was writing was
ending his story roughly where he was.
It's the early '60s. Paul is still
alive. This is the end of the story cuz
this is when he's writing it. Mhm. And
then one of the key reasons that
scholars reject that sort of intuitive
conclusion is that they don't want to
give Jesus credit for a prophecy. They
don't want to say
>> Oh, wow. Like
Like, you know, um
Yeah. And which is
So,
do you Yeah, I can tell
>> Go go ahead. Tell Tell me Tell me Tell
me why you think that's that's a
mistaken reading.
>> Yeah, no, I understand that argument.
Yeah, I understand it. Wow. I I
absolutely don't think that's why
scholars came up with that, but okay.
>> Okay. Okay. [laughter] Okay. Okay, good.
So, uh yeah, no, of course, that's what
I thought, you know, for for many years
is that that's the best way to explain
it. Um there are reasons for thinking
the Gospels were written later than
that. And so, then it's a legitimate uh
argument then, well, then why does why
does the Book of Acts end while Paul is
in prison in Rome in the '60s? So,
uh two things about that. One, I agree
that Jesus predicted the destruction of
Jerusalem. So, I don't late date them
because of that. Uh number two,
And Jesus predicted it because it was
just in keeping with Old Testament
prophecy, right? You're saying not You
don't think Just to be clear, you don't
think Jesus
literally knew the destruction was going
to happen. I don't think he had
supernatural knowledge, no. There were
other There were other Jews at the time
who were predicting the destruct
destruction of Jerusalem.
Uh so, you know, thinking, you know,
it's kind of like, you know, people
today, you know, might say might predict
something that's going to happen about
the war in Iran, you know, and they'll
>> [clears throat]
>> they'll come up with some prediction.
>> And somebody will be right.
>> Somebody will be right. So, so, uh you
know, you can read the handwriting on
the wall kind of thing.
Um
there are good reasons for thinking why
the author of Luke-Acts would have
wanted to end Acts before Paul was uh
finally put on trial and executed.
Um
the whole point of the Book of Acts is
uh So, for those who don't know, the
Book of Acts, as you said, begins after
Jesus' resurrection, and then he he
ascends to heaven, and then the day of
Pentecost happens, and Christianity
starts spreading throughout the world.
So, it covers about a 30-year period um
of the early spread of Christianity.
One of the major theses of Acts, one of
its themes, is that this is a movement
that cannot be stopped.
Paul in particular cannot be stopped. Um
Paul goes into a a town and he gets
persecuted, and they beat him, and he
just goes to the next town and starts
another church. And they try to stop him
there, can't stop him. At one point they
stone him, gets up, goes to the next
town. There's nothing you can do because
the spirit is behind this whole thing.
>> That's right. It's like podcast. Yeah.
Unstoppable. Unstoppable.
Uh and very interesting. So, um the uh
the deal is if that Paul's execution had
been narrated, he would have been
stopped. Luke is trying to show that
this is an unstoppable movement. So,
he's not going to narrate
the execution.
Okay. I I promised my producers we
wouldn't do the 7-hour debate. So, I'm
I'm resisting [laughter] I am resisting
the urge to argue incredibly deeply.
Just
one two two questions. First, one, I've
read your work, and so I know that you
think it's possible or likely that Jesus
made these predictions.
>> Yeah.
Isn't Aren't there a lot of scholars who
think that Jesus' predictions are a
reason
to date
the Gospels later? Isn't Isn't that
a Not Again, I agree, it's not the only
reason, but it is it is a it is a
significant reason given.
>> It would be The The deal is with that is
that it's not quite that simple. It's
that some of these predictions,
especially in Luke, seem to show a
detailed knowledge of what's going to
happen when it happens. It's just not
that the Temple's going to be destroyed.
It's that Roman troops are going to
surround the city, that the Gentiles are
going to trample It goes into detail
that looks like it's it's projecting
backwards something that they know
about. But some of those details are
also wrong, right? Like there's claims
about what season it happens in, right?
Like pray that it doesn't happen in
Well, yeah, no, but
the prediction that the people say is
wrong is when in Mark 13 Jesus says not
one stone will be left upon another.
>> Right. And people can today can go to
the Western Wall. There are stones still
there. But the problem is that Mark
wasn't from Jerusalem.
He He He And when they people talk about
the destruction of Jerusalem, even
today, they talk about it as completely
destroyed, and it wasn't. So, the fact
that Mark has it wrong doesn't mean that
he he was living before the event. Okay.
So, there [snorts] but so you're saying
that there are specific there are more
specific reasons to think that the
prophecies are written. So, if you just
first of all, it's fine for you to say
okay, Luke's theme is that Paul can't be
stopped. So, he doesn't want to end with
Paul being stopped. But if Luke is
writing decades and decades later,
everyone knows that Paul was stopped.
Everyone knows that Paul was martyred,
right? So, you think that And it and it
seems that but he's telling a story to
an audience that is aware of events,
right? So, if you're telling a story
about Martin Luther King,
right? And you write the story and you
end the story, you know, somewhere
just, you know, short short of his
assassination and it's not a history
just of Martin Luther King, it's a
history of the whole civil rights
movement and it leaves out like a whole
sort of back half of these events. That
would be an an odd narrative choice
given that every body knows everyone
involved in the civil rights movement,
everyone involved in American history
ever since knows that the signal thing
about the end of Martin Luther King's
career was that he was assassinated and
by the way, there were riots, there
were, you know, there's a whole
transformation of American politics
associated with it. It just seems like a
big one, it's a big challenge to write
about that without letting that creep
into your text.
>> That's right. Two, why if your theme is
that Paul could not be stopped and
you're a Christian who believes in the
resurrection, why wouldn't you end with
Paul's martyrdom and say like, you know,
like other Christian martyrs of which
there are many, he continues to, you
know, influence and shape the church to
this day and give sort of further
examples. Wouldn't that be just the much
more rhetorically natural style? Well,
maybe but you can't tell an author what
he needs to write. And the Martin Luther
King thing, it's an interesting analogy
but I don't think it quite works because
that's really kind of the point is the
assassination. For Paul, according to
Luke, that's not the point at all. For
one thing, we don't have a lot of
records of people who were being
martyred at the time. We actually don't
know a lot about Paul's death. The
earliest reference we have to Paul
experiencing martyrdom is around the
year 95 by
a book called First Clement. And so, we
don't have records. We don't we don't
know what this author even knew,
actually. But if he's writing later, by
the time he's writing, Nero's
persecution has happened. You have had
substantial Christian martyrdoms of some
kind. Martyrdom is would be, you know,
part of the story that Christians have
to tell. Just seems odd to leave it out.
Well, it'd seem odd if you'd but, you
know, there we have lots of historical
writings from the ancient world and they
don't end where you think they might
where you would end them. And so, it's
common to tell a life to tell a
biography that has a section of a
person's life. So,
I understand it might seem weird but I
think it seems weirder if you just if
you already assume that Luke was was
writing before 70, then it'd be seem
weird to you to think that somebody
would think otherwise. I get that.
But the question is what is the actual
evidence?
It's not where he stops. You can't you
can't That is not that is evidence. It's
not the decisive evidence maybe but it
is evidence, right?
>> So, you have No, that's right. You look
at every piece of evidence and you weigh
you weigh the probabilities. Okay. All
right.
Um
let's move on from there. Uh Let's go
back to the very first point you made
for reasons to treat the Gospels
skeptically, which is about
contradictions
between them.
>> Mhm. Um just give me a couple examples
just so listeners have them of
places where the Gospels contradict
themselves or contradict each other
Yeah.
>> in ways that cast doubt on their
historical viability or validity, not
viability, sorry.
>> um yeah, so, you know, I've written kind
of a long book on the Jesus Interrupted
is the book where I deal with a lot of
these. I mean, but they're they're at
they're at all levels. I mean, it's
interesting cuz they're at all levels.
So, just here on a basic level, in
Mark's Gospel, usually thought to be the
first Gospel,
um Jesus is sending out his disciples
and telling them to go heal the sick and
cast out demons and preach the good news
and he says, um
"When you go, don't take a backpack,
don't take extra sandals, don't take any
money but do take a staff."
Okay, you got to take a staff cuz you're
going to be walking. So, so Matthew has
exactly the same episode, word for word
the same in places and in Matthew, he
says to his disciples, "Okay, so don't
take a backpack, don't take extra
sandals, don't take a don't take any
extra money and don't take a staff."
It's like, "Wait a second."
Right.
>> So, like so this is kind of like an
obvious thing where it's either like
okay, he either said take a staff or
don't take a staff but he probably
didn't say So, so things like that, you
get you know, those are those are little
things. Um but sometimes you get fairly
big things like what day did Jesus die?
Um
in um
All the Gospels locate his death around
the time of the Passover feast.
Mark explicitly has Jesus himself eat
the Passover feast with his disciples
and he takes the symbolic foods of the
Passover feast, the bread and the wine
and he instills new significance in
them, says this is my body that's
broken, this is my blood's given for
many and he
and so, they've had the Passover meal,
he's arrested afterwards and he is
spends the night in jail, he's crucified
the next morning at 9:00 o'clock in the
morning.
Mark specifically dates all of these
things. John, our last Gospel, also
gives specific dates um for when things
happen. Jesus does have a last meal but
it's not a not said to be a Passover
meal.
He talks with his disciples for five
chapters as I said and then afterwards,
he's arrested, put in jail, he's put and
he's Pilot condemns him to death and
he's crucified afternoon on the day
they're preparing the Passover meal.
A day earlier. Right. Specifically dated
in both cases. John 19:14. So, um yeah.
So, you have that kind of those are
those are kind of detailed things that
make you think, you know, somebody's
changing something for some reason of
their own. And I think and that's
absolutely I think what's happening.
People are changing things for reasons
of their own.
But there are lots of other things that
are simply, I mean, they're just like
very big issues involved with like what
did Jesus actually preach? Why did Jesus
do miracles? Why, you know,
like big issues between the Gospels. But
for most people like like me, when I was
an evangelical, it took a little thing
that I just couldn't reconcile anymore
to make me realize these are not
inherent. And once you realize that, it
opens up the it actually improves your
interpretation of these Gospels. It
makes it possible to understand each
Gospel for what they're trying to say
rather than trying to make them all say
the same thing.
Yeah, I I guess so, to me, as someone
I'm not a fundamentalist Christian,
um
I'm a Catholic and Catholics believe in
some version of inerrancy of scripture
but being Catholic, you know, there's
like 17 different theological schools,
right? About what about what that means.
To me though, it often seems like
at least some of the kinds of things
you're describing,
while they would undermine faith if you
if you feel obliged to believe that,
you know, the Gospels can never
get a name wrong or a date wrong or
anything like that or else you have to
throw them out.
If you're evaluating
the likelihood that these are texts that
actually come from eyewitnesses, come
from eyewitnesses, right? Through
mediation, someone is writing down
eyewitness accounts, fine, right? But
but come from eyewitnesses.
They're actually what you would expect,
right? Like this is So, I, you know,
I've written, I guess, two memoirish
books.
Um
and one of them was about my
undergraduate experience,
uh God help me. And one of the one of
them one of them was about having
Lyme disease. And in both cases, just
the nature of memoir writing means sort
of at phase one, you, [snorts]
you know, you misremember certain
things, you get certain things wrong.
You're a writer so you sort of telescope
narratives, sometimes things are
compressed and so on, right?
>> Mhm. Um
all of that happens and yet I still
think of them as Mhm. truthful
testimonies about what happened to me
that some future historian could
reasonably rely on. Then in the case of
the Lyme disease book, you know, my wife
wrote a book about the science of sort
of the maternal transformation in which
she discussed some of her own
experiences as a mother and included
details about being the wife of someone
struggling with Lyme disease and, you
know, when I read her account, there
were obviously there were things that
she interpreted differently. So, two
people married, living in the same
house, raising kids together, right?
>> Yeah.
Different is entering from the
beginning. But
that happening in the Gospels seems like
in a certain way evidence of their
basic historical reliability just in the
sense that like if I handed you as a
historian, right? Four documents written
by different authors and they all agreed
on every particular, right? They all
they all hit the same point and their
theology was clear. They all had exactly
the same theology.
>> Yeah.
Wouldn't you be more skeptical of those
documents than you would be of Yes.
Right. Okay, then then the my work here
my work here is done, I guess.
>> No, no, it's not because I mean, would
would that we had memoirs?
We don't have memoirs. These people
don't claim to be eyewitnesses. They
don't claim to
I mean, these these are not eyewitness
reports. I mean, if Peter had written a
Gospel, that'd be great. Unfortunately,
Peter was illiterate and so, he I mean,
even in In New Testament by the way,
Peter is called illiterate. Acts chapter
4 verse 13, he was agrammatos, couldn't
didn't know his letters. So, we don't
have anything from these apostles. What
we have are stories in a different
language
in different parts of the world from
people who weren't there
who are telling us what they've heard.
And so, that's not the same as you
writing a memoir.
So, it's not the same as me writing a
memoir. At the same time though, and
this is where
you know, I I guess we just sort of
disagree. Like, I think Mark is pretty
clearly
Peter talking to somebody. Like, that's
why.
Because it appears as Peter's story,
right?
>> What? No, it doesn't. No, it doesn't. I
mean, Peter Peter is a dominant
character in it relative to the other
gospels. Peter's there's all these like
little grace notes in Aramaic where
Peter and somebody remembering exactly
sort of the word Jesus speaks and so on,
right? You don't You don't think that's
And And like Wait, if you're raised
thinking Peter, this is Peter's gospel,
then it might sound like that. If you
have no assumption about that at all,
you would it would never occur to you
that this is Peter's version of the
story. All right, I'm I'm
I'm not going to I just think that
there's no sense the gospels don't claim
to be by eyewitnesses.
That to say that they're eyewitness
testimonies,
on what grounds? Why would you think
that? You don't think that I mean, when
you read other ancient book histories, I
mean, you know, and when you read
ancient historians like Thucydides, he
tells you that he doesn't know what
these speeches were what the speeches
were like. He How would he know? He
wasn't there. He made them up. He tells
us he made them That's what historians
do, he says, they make it up. You know
who the care person is and you think,
well, what would he likely have said in
this case? Well, then you come up with
something.
>> Right, but in the case just in the
synoptic gospels, right? Across the
different sources that Mark Matthew I
mean, that Matthew and Luke are using
since we know they're probably using
Mark setting aside other debates there.
Um
Jesus doesn't Jesus doesn't come across
as a character that Thucydides made up.
He comes across as someone who's being
described by people who listened to him
talk. Don't you You don't think so? So,
we have the Sermon on the Mount. It's
found only in Matthew chapters 5, 6, and
7. It's three chapters long. Matthew's
usually dated to around the year 80 to
85. Unless unless Luke was written
earlier, in which case Matthew's
earlier. But But sure, yeah. So,
I asked my students whether they heard
the last inaugural address.
You know, say some I did this some month
after the last inaugural address. They
said, yes, I heard. I said, okay, write
it down for me.
How could they possibly write it down?
How could somebody 50 years after Jesus
gave this address know what he said?
And if Jesus did give the Sermon on the
Mount, why isn't it in any of the other
gospels?
Like, they just didn't think that part
was important?
You see what I'm saying? These are
stories about Jesus that have been
circulating that different authors have
put together in different ways. And the
reason Matthew, Mark, and Luke sound so
similar is because Matthew and Luke used
Mark.
They got They have the same source. I
will just say the claim about why people
would remember the words of Jesus and
why they're different from listening to
Donald Trump give an endless, you know,
an an endless inaugural address, right?
Is that these stories were told to
people who were explicitly his
followers, who believed him to be
potentially the Messiah, who were often
living in community with one another,
and who then experienced a radically
transformative event um that caused them
to have stronger reasons from the
beginning to share and circulate and
remember these stories. And therefore,
they're more like
more like maybe somebody writing a story
about their own family
20 or 30 years later or sharing stories
about their own family than they are
like me sharing a story about what I
remember the first inaugural address to
be. So, the fact that these were
followers of Jesus is probably not the
reason for thinking they're more
historically accurate. Because the
followers of Jesus have their own
reasons for portraying Jesus in ways
that they understand him.
People tell stories all the time about
people that they are important to them,
and the stories change.
So, the question is how What do we know
about oral tradition?
>> [snorts]
>> What do we know about how people passed
on stories both today and in antiquity?
And there's actually a whole field of
research on this. And it's not favorable
to the idea that people remembered
things verbatim.
Since uh for for
>> But they don't they don't have to
remember things verbatim to have
general accuracy that's different from
someone making up a speech, right? And
to to your to your own example, right?
If someone if if one community remembers
that Jesus said, "Do take a staff." and
one community remembers that he said,
"Don't take a staff." right? You still
could have a pretty good sense that
Jesus said some version of that of that
dialogue.
>> No, you don't know that Jesus said it.
You have to analyze it. What are the
grounds for thinking he said it? Just
like what are the grounds for thinking
that George Washington said something or
other? How do you go about establishing
it? It isn't just because it's found in
several sources, especially if these
sources used each other. If you got
three biographies of George Washington
that all say he said the same thing, and
these biographers all used each other,
then that's not, you know, you got one
source, you don't have three sources.
One of the people you've debated in your
many debates is a uh
scholar writer named Peter Williams,
Yeah. who wrote a book called Can We
Trust the Gospels, right? Have you seen
my debate with him?
>> Yes. So, I I encourage people who want
to know about
about his views about things and my
views to watch that debate.
>> I I encourage that as well, and it gives
you the extra 2 hours that this
conversation
>> [laughter]
>> is is missing, right? But this this will
be my last question on this point.
Williams makes the argument that if you
look at details in the gospels that are
not about sort of things Jesus said, but
are about place names, geography, right?
How often does a given name appear,
right? Like, you know,
versus what was actually common
in the '30s
or the '20s, right? In in Palestine.
Uh they do remarkably well. It looks
like the people who are describing
writing and talking about these things
actually knew the geography of the Holy
Land quite well, actually knew sort of
the nomenclature
of people in this region quite well,
right? Um and I watched your debate, and
you said basically something to the
effect of um just because somebody
gets it right
that uh
you know, New York City has
five streets going this way and that the
typical name in the Bronx is Vinnie,
right? It doesn't mean that they're
going to be right about what happened on
a particular day in a particular, you
know, an actual event, right?
Which
is a is a fair point. At the same time,
in the back and forth we've just been
having, right? You've been emphasizing
the idea that you know, gospels are
written decades later, they're written
in in another language, they're written
maybe written down all over the Roman
Empire, right? Not just in the Near
East.
And that [clears throat]
you know, because of this, you know,
when you're talking about like things
Jesus said,
there's just too many cycles, too much
distance, and so on.
Why didn't those cycles and those
distance make Williams's argument
obsolete? Like, why
don't people just get the names wrong
after 60 years? Why don't they start
introducing massive errors of geography
too? If there Why are all the errors
that you imagine to be there about
things Jesus said as opposed to like,
"Where is Jericho in relationship to
Jerusalem?" Shouldn't there be more
errors of fact
just through this cycle process you're
describing?
>> Well, there are errors of fact that
Peter doesn't talk about in the gospels.
I mean, they're just geographical
errors. So, you know, there are those
things.
Um The fact that somebody tells a story
about a certain place and gets the place
names right doesn't mean that the
story's right.
No, absolutely. But
>> So, it's got
It's irrelevant to the question about
whether the stories about Jesus are
things that happened.
>> can't it can't be irrelevant in the
sense that like, if the gospels got
place names badly wrong and introduced a
lot of random weird names in place of
what were actually the names that were
normal in 25 AD, you as a historian
would say, "Well, that's a reason to
think it's not true." That's right.
>> So, the fact that they get things right
has to be a reason for giving them some
credit.
>> work that way. Why not? Okay.
It doesn't work that way because of
this.
If you know the location of places, that
doesn't mean that you know what happened
in those locations.
You're asking about what is what's
described Jesus having said and done
accurate.
If you say, well, it must be accurate
because he knows where Jericho is in
relationship to Jerusalem.
>> I'm not saying that it must be accurate.
I'm saying that you you are saying that
the process of oral tradition
necessarily introduces
a large set of errors in terms of memory
of statements. I'm not saying it
necessarily does, but it
It does, but it doesn't but Look,
if there were errors all over the place
about geography, that would call the
stories into question.
If there are not errors of geography,
then it's neutral. Are the stories
historical or not?
No, but it's evidence It's not It's not
neutral because it strongly implies
that the people the origins of these
stories
that certain key elements of these
stories were transmitted successfully
across the process you've described.
That's all I'm saying. Yes, if you tell
a story
>> the place the place where the geography
of the Near East, allowing for some
errors, was transmitted fairly
successfully across Yeah, it's not
actually not all that You want to know
the truth, but I mean there there are
there are geographical errors. But look,
if I tell the story about somebody
murdered right in front of the Empire
State Building, the fact I know where
the Empire State Building is doesn't
mean the person was murdered there. All
right, let's
let's I I will
>> [laughter]
>> I will return return us to our original
theme and and bring and bring us to a
close
like like Luke ending when there was so
much more to be said.
>> [laughter]
>> So,
just as a historian then, we've sort of
walked around this a few times, but just
directly, what do you make of the
resurrection stories? What do you think
happened for Easter week? Yeah, I think
I think the followers of Jesus
definitely thought that before he died
before I think they thought that he must
be the Messiah.
Um,
or that he he he possibly was the
Messiah. There are different views about
what the Messiah would be at the time
within Judaism.
Um, but whatever the view was, every
view of the Messiah thought that he
would be a
a powerful figure who would overthrow
the enemies of God and set up a kingdom
of some way.
>> [snorts]
>> Um, that was their expectation. Rather
than that happening though, Jesus was
arrested and he was put on trial and was
crucified, publicly humiliated and
tortured to death.
Um,
I think it's absolutely the case that
some of his disciples afterwards thought
that he had been raised from the dead.
My sense is that some of them thought
they saw him alive afterwards. I don't
know how many people had the visions. I
don't know whether they were groups,
whether a few individuals. Eventually
they convinced the others and people
came to think that Jesus was raised from
the dead.
They started proclaiming that. Uh, they
convinced people of it and that's the
beginning of Christianity.
Now, if you're a Christian,
um, that's perfectly fine because you
can just say, well, yes, he did appear
to people.
Um, if you're not a Christian, it's also
perfectly fine. You can say they they
thought they had visions of Jesus. They
they
you could you don't have to have an
explanation. It could be a mistaken
identity. It could be a dream. It could
be you there are all sorts of people
have visions
>> Probably not a mistaken identity. It's
right. I mean, that that seems that you
just you see Jesus' cousin who looks
like him and you think he's alive again.
>> A couple years ago I was giving a
lecture in Michigan and there's a guy in
the third row who I thought was my dad.
Right. My dad had died 15 years before
that.
So, I just it just like, oh my god, that
just looks So, you're say so but so but
so then start so mistaken identity you
mean one person has this experience.
It's not that everybody thinks there's a
guy walking around who looks
>> don't I don't think Jesus appeared to
500 people one time.
I think it's pretty clear. Paul Paul
believes he saw Jesus.
We don't know how he would have
identified Jesus. He didn't know Jesus
during his lifetime, but he saw
something he said was Jesus. I think
Peter claimed to have a vision of Jesus.
I think Mary Magdalene probably did. Do
you think that because, um, as a reader,
like the scene where Mary Magdalene
encounters Jesus seems kind of like it
comes from an eyewitness account?
>> No. No, okay. All right. I can't I can't
sell you on that at all? No, well, how
would how would you verify that?
>> So, why do you So, why do you think Mary
Magdalene had a vision of Jesus if you
don't
>> as a historian, you look at independent
sources that that claim something and
it's independently attested that Peter
did and Mary did.
Um, and so I think that that's
completely plausible.
>> Okay. There's also
>> You're not but you're you're never
struck by these passages just sort of
as a human being encountering another
human being's narrative and think to
yourself that that something like that
happened? Well, I'm struck by the
passages. They're extremely powerful
passages. But that doesn't mean they
happened.
And so, I think that
you know, the one of the interesting
things about the resurrection two things
that people haven't noticed. My first
point is that the empty tomb in the New
Testament never brings about faith.
It always brings doubt.
>> Yep. And so, it's not it was never taken
as the evidence. So, and
>> I and I will say if I encountered the
empty tomb, it would not have turned me
into
No, it's it's a source of yeah,
which is again part of what is
strikes me as quite realistic about the
narratives that people don't respond to
the empty tomb by saying, ah, now we
will proclaim Christ risen, right?
>> Yeah, well, okay, and fair enough. And
but that's the other interesting thing
is that all the resurrection narratives
are filled with doubt.
Um, in the book of Acts, one of the
strangest verses in the New Testament is
Acts chapter 1 verse 3 where it says
that Jesus spent 40 days with his
disciples proving to them with many
proofs that he was alive.
And you think, how many proofs does he
need?
And how many
And why does it take 40 days? And so,
but that is the interesting thing is
that in all of these accounts, you have
these doubt traditions. What are those
doubt traditions about?
>> Aren't they about the fact that as you
yourself said earlier, people do not
normally rise from the dead and so
the normal the normal human reaction is
the, you know, doubting Thomas reaction
to say,
let me let me touch him. It would be,
but if you're sitting here in front of
me, I'm not doubting you're sitting here
in front of me. I think well, if your
father, your late father was sitting
here in front of you, you would doubt
that I would that he was sitting there
in front of you, right?
>> he wasn't. Right. I thought he was.
Right. Right. So, if if he had spent 40
days with me, he wouldn't have to be
doing tricks to prove to me he was
alive.
And so, my point is I think
>> like if my my father is still alive, I
feel like if my father died an awful
death of crucifixion and then he started
appearing to me, it would take a long
time before I was ready to believe that
he was really there. You might think
that, but in fact, you know, there are a
lot of psychological studies of visions,
especially of recently deceased loved
ones.
And virtually everybody who has it is
sure it happened.
Right, but the claim the claim that the
early Christians make is precisely that
this isn't just a vision of a departed
loved one. This is a world-altering
event that is going to inspire them to
missionary work and martyrdom, which
most people who have
a vision, a dream, or whatever about
their departed loved one don't have,
right? It just seems like
your account of this as,
you know, something that happens all the
time. People somebody dies and, uh, you
know, and people have visions
and they sort of decide that the vision
was real
just seems quite different from a
situation where you have more radical
claims and a lot of doubt about these
radical claims all mixed together in a
way that suddenly sets a new religion in
motion.
>> Oh, no, I can explain that. I mean,
because we didn't get to that part, but
so I know you're we're we're almost at
our 7 hours here, but let me just say
that my point of saying that they
thought Jesus was the Messiah before he
died is the critical point.
Because when he got crucified, it showed
he was not the Messiah. He was not the
one who was going to destroy the
enemies.
But then they had these visions and they
came to think he was alive again.
So, they thought, oh, we misunderstood.
We thought he was going to destroy the
Romans. God must have wanted him to die.
The fact that God wanted him to die is
shown in the fact that God raised him
from the dead.
He's raised from the dead.
His death is the way of salvation then.
Jesus must have had to die. God must
have wanted him to die cuz he was the
chosen one. How do we know he's the
chosen one? He got raised from the dead.
Well, if God had his chosen one
killed, why?
Sacrifice for sins. That's the beginning
of Christianity. As soon as these people
started realizing, oh my god, he's
raised from the dead, they thought this
death was a sacrifice. That starts
Christianity.
>> So, why is there the doubt tradition?
Why is there all this material about the
need for physical proof and like what
why isn't why isn't the collective I'm
saying why isn't the collective vision
enough? Why do why do the Gospels lean
so hard one on this mystery, the tomb is
empty, we can't explain it. Why two on
sort of describing these encounters with
Jesus that are like
hard to figure out, you know, you're
seeing him on the road to Emmaus. He's
eating fish. He's here, he's there. Like
why why why doesn't the vision stuff
sort of clean things up? Especially
again given that in your account these
are all being, you know, written later
and smoothed out.
>> Because by that time when they're being
written later, we have records of
Christians who think that Jesus wasn't
physically raised from the dead, but was
spiritually raised from the dead. He's
Paul saying, no, no, no, it's a physical
resurrection.
These accounts in Luke and John where
Jesus is eating fish and, you know,
touching my wounds and things is meant
to show that it actually was a physical
resurrection.
So, these authors are trying to show
that this is not just like some kind of
spirit of Jesus going up to heaven or
something. This is actually a physical
resurrection which fits into the Jewish
apocalyptic view.
>> But but why are they including all of
the doubt?
They include the doubt because it's
historical. There were there were
apostles who doubted it. Right, but
you're trying to sell an argument
decades and decades after the fact,
>> to prove that Jesus really was raised.
Right, but why are the stories so
strange? Why are they not sort of
straightforward, you know, Jesus was
raised and then he taught us these
things and that's it. Why do you have,
you know, you've got all the empty tomb
stories. You've got people not
recognizing him and then recognizing
him, right? You've got he's passing
through walls one moment, he's eating
fish the next, right? Doesn't that seem
to reflect a fundamental initial
strangeness in how people are
experiencing it rather than something
that is constructed for propaganda
purposes decades later? Uh, propaganda
Wait, wait, wait, you're putting words
in my lips. My You're saying you're
saying that they had to emphasize the
physical reality to win an argument with
the spiritual side, the people who said
it was spiritual. And I'm saying that it
just seems like it's all a weird mixture
from the start.
>> It is a weird mixture from the start.
I'm Look, if if if if you see somebody
that you was publicly executed and then
you see them alive, it's going to be a
weird experience. But my point about the
proof, the eating the fish and things is
that these people are telling these
stories about Jesus' resurrection to
people who don't believe.
And they're saying, "Yes, you don't
believe, it doesn't make sense, but I'm
telling you,
we saw him eat fish afterwards."
So, you know, there was an empty tomb.
These are proofs to convince those who
are doubting. So, you put doubt into the
story to show that the doubts were
resolved within the story. Let's end by
just going back going back to your book,
right? And
um
we started this conversation a long time
ago talking about the moral
transformation that Jesus made and the
idea that
you know,
you were supposed to love your enemies,
love people who persecuted you, love the
stranger far away who has nothing in
common with you. All of these sort of
transformative ideas, right?
You like those ideas.
I Yes, I do.
>> Yes, you do.
If the Gospels ended
with the crucifixion
and [snorts and clears throat] Jesus'
death, right?
Um
the
you would have a story where someone
came along and preached that, you know,
it was important to love your enemies
and important to care for the stranger
and so on.
Um
and
that person was crucified
and died a horrible death and that was
the end of the story.
>> [snorts]
>> And
he talked about the meek inheriting the
earth and the last being first and look
where he ended up.
Right?
Isn't the power
of the argument for Jesus' ethics kind
of inherently bound up in the idea that
he won?
Well, Christianity would not have become
a thing if Jesus had died and there was
no story of his resurrection. It just
would have been He would have been
another prophet who preached something
and then got killed for it and boom,
that was it. So, there wouldn't be
Christianity.
But, the the power of the Christian
message from the very beginning was uh
the message that Paul has, which is that
it seems, you know, it seems a little
bit ridiculous that that God's chosen
one is crucified and it it seems a
little bit ridiculous that the way the
way to
access ultimate divine power is by being
a slave.
And it's but it's Jesus' message. You
have to serve others rather than
dominate message. It's so contrary to
what's in our DNA and what's in every
other culture, but because they thought
he got raised from the dead, they
thought it proved it. You you you have
to be willing to die for others if you
want to have life. If you want to have
treasures in heaven, you have to sell
everything you have now. Completely
contrary to what people would think.
But, it's because of the resurrection.
Yes, absolutely. It's the belief in the
resurrection that that ends up making
this the powerful message that
transformed the West.
And isn't it also just it to your own
personal reasons for being an agnostic
or a non-believer, right? Part of the
power is also that it
it's not a logical answer, but it's at
least a poetic answer to the problem of
evil, right? The the question of why God
allows suffering is not resolved by God
himself suffering, but it is at least
addressed. It's a powerful message. The
God I mean, when I was still a liberal
Christian, when I was a liberal
Christian, I thought that the point of
the Gospel message was really that that
God had entered into the world and
suffered with us.
And that's a very powerful message. I
mean, it's not one that I agree with
anymore, but I I can recognize it is a
really powerful message and that's it's
so contrary to the way of the world um
that it had that has
special poignancy to it. And here you
are, you know, so many years later, a,
you know, sterling example of
academic historical skepticism and
you're writing a book trying to persuade
people that, you know, Jesus' message
has something to it.
Is it possible that you're still, in
some sense, a follower of Jesus of
Nazareth? I sometimes call myself a
Christian atheist.
Um
because I don't I don't believe in God.
I I don't I
absolutely don't believe in God or any
supernatural powers, but I do think that
the teachings of Jesus are something
that I want to replicate in my life as
much as I can.
But, although, you know, I'm not a very
good follower of Jesus. I haven't sold
everything and given to the poor, but I
but I um
I think that that message is one that
that I want to embrace.
Okay.
Ehrman, thank you for joining me. Thank
you. And happy Easter in advance.
>> Happy Easter.
>> [music]